>> Ifill: A STRING OF SHOOTINGS
ROCK CANADA WITH SHOTS FIRED IN
PARLIAMENT.
POLICE ORDER LOCKDOWNS.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ALSO AHEAD THIS WEDNESDAY,
PUTTING EBOLA IN PERSPECTIVE SIX
DISEASES THAT SHOULD WORRY
AMERICANS MORE.
>> Ifill: THE ISLAMIC STATE
GROUP'S SOCIAL MEDIA CAMPAIGN TO
REACH POTENTIAL RECRUITS LIVING
BEYOND THE WARZONE THE U.S.
STATE DEPARTMENT USES SIMILAR
TACTICS TO STOP PEOPLE FROM
TURNING TO TERRORISM.
>> IF YOU TURN ONE YOUNG MAN
AWAY, THINK OF THE REPERCUSSIONS
FOR THAT.
YOU KNOW, HE COULD'VE PUT A
ROADSIDE BOMB SOMEWHERE.
HE COULD HAVE KILLED A FAMILY
SOMEWHERE IN IRAQ OR SYRIA.
I MEAN, IT'S INCALCULABLE, THE
VALUE.
>> Woodruff: PLUS, WE REMEMBER
"WASHINGTON POST" EDITOR BEN
BRADLEE WHO LED THE PAR'SPE
HISTORIC COVERAGE OF THE
WATERGATE SCANDAL.
>> IT CHANGES YOUR LIFE, THE
PURSUIT OF TRUTH.
AT LEAST, IF YOU KNOW THAT YOU
HAVE TRIED TO FIND THE TRUTH
IT'S VERY EXCITING, I FIND.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: CHAOS CAME TO THE
HEART OF CANADA'S CAPITAL CITY
TODAY.
A RARE MASS SHOOTING LEFT ONE
SOLDIER AND A GUNMAN DEAD, AND
THREE PEOPLE WOUNDED.
IT ALSO TRIGGERED A DAY OF HIGH
DRAMA THAT INCLUDED UNCONFIRMED
REPORTS OF MULTIPLE ATTACKERS
AND SPECULATION ABOUT WHETHER A
TERROR GROUP WAS INVOLVED.
>> AT 9:52 A.M. THIS MORNING,
THE OTTAWA POLICE SERVICE
RECEIVED MULTIPLE 9-11 CALLS
REGARDING A SHOOTING AT THE
NATIONAL WAR MEMORIAL.
>> Ifill: WITNESSES TO THAT
INITIAL INCIDENT AT THE MEMORIAL
SITE SAY A MAN DRESSED ALL IN
BLACK WH A ITRIFLE GUNNED DOWN
ONE OF THE HONOR GUARD.
FROM THERE, THEY SAY HE RAN
TOWARD THE MAIN PARLIAMENT
BUILDING, A SHORT DISTANCE AWAY
IN CENTRAL OTTAWA.
WITHIN MOMENTS, MORE SHOOTING
ERUPTED.
POLICE AND SOLDIERS QUICKLY
DESCENDED ON THE BUILDING, WITH
WEAPONS DRAWN.
FOOTAGE TAKEN BY A "GLOBE AND
MAIL" NEWSPAPER REPORTER
CAPTURED THE SOUND OF GUNFIRE
ECHOING DOWN THE HALLS.
>> SHOTS, DON'T REALLY KNOW.
THOUGHT IT WAS DYNAMITE OR
CONSTRUCTION RATHER THAN
ANYTHING ELSE.
SUDDENLY THE SECURITY GUARD'S
COME RUSHING DOWN THE HALLWAYS,
USHER US ALL OUT TO THE BACK OF
THE PARLIAMENTARY BUILDINGS.
>> Ifill: A CABINET MINISTER
SAID THE SHOOTER RAN RIGHT PAST
A ROOM WHERE PRIME MINISTER
STEPHEN HARPER WAS ADDRESSING
LAWMAKERS.
OTTAWA POLICE CONFIRMED LATER
THE GUNMAN WAS SHOT AND KILLED,
BUT A SEARCH OF THE AREA
CONTINUED THROUGH THE AFTERNOON.
>> WHAT WE'RE ASKING THE
COMMUNITY IS TO BE IS TO
CONTINUE TO BE AWARE, TO BE
VIGILANT AND TO REPORT ANY
SUSPICIOUS ACTIVITY THAT THEY
DEEM IS SERIOUS THAT COULD
IMPACT THEIR SAFETY.
>> Ifill: THE ATTACK CAME JUST
TWO DAYS AFTER A MAN WITH
ISLAMIST TIES KILLED A CANADIAN
SOLDIER WITH HIS CAR NEAR
MONTREAL BEFORE BEING SHOT DEAD.
AFTER THAT, CANADIAN AUTHORITIES
RAISED THE NATIONAL THREAT
LEVEL, BUT THEY SAY THEY HAD NO
WARNING OF WHAT WAS TO COME
TODAY.
>> I THINKS ITS STILL TOO EARLY
TO CONFIRM THAT BUT I THINK THAT
FROM OUR REACTION I THINK THAT
IT CAUGHT US BY SURPRISE.
>> Ifill: IN THE AFTERMATH, THE
CANADIAN MILITARY CLOSED PUBLIC
ACCESS TO ALL OF ITS BASES.
AND PRESIDENT OBAMA SPOKE BY
PHONE WITH PRIME MINISTER
HARPER, AND OFFERED AMERICAN
HELP.
>> Ifill: CAMPBELL CLARK IS
CHIEF POLITICAL WRITER FOR THE
"GLOBE AND MAIL" NEWSPAPER.
I SPOKE TO HIM A SHORT TIME AGO
ABOUT THE SURPRISING ATTACK IN
CANADA'S CAPITAL.
>> FOR HALF HOUR, HOUR WE'VE
BEEN HEARING REPORTS ABOUT WHO
THE SHOOTER MAY HAVE BEEN.
THERE HAS BEEN A NAME REPORTED,
BUT WE DON'T KNOW TOO MUCH ABOUT
HIM YET.
A LOT OF IT IS SPECULATION, BUT
THERE IS NOW SOME SUSPICION THAT
THIS IS SOMEBODY WHO WAS
PROBABLY INSPIRED BY ISLAMIST
IDEOLOGY AND ISIL.
THAT'S NOT CONFIRMED, AND THE
POLICE CERTAINLY HAVEN'T
CONFIRMED THE IDENTITY YET.
>> Ifill: LET'S GET BACK TO
WHAT WE DO KNOW ABOUT WHAT
HAPPENED TODAY.
THERE IS A DEFINITE CONNECTION
AS FAR AS WE KNOW TO WHAT
HAPPENED AT THE WAR MEMORIAL AND
WHAT HAPPENED AT THE PARLIAMENT,
IS THAT CORRECT?
>> THAT'S CORRECT, YES.
THERE WAS SOMEBODY WHO WAS SHOT
AND KILLED AT THE WAR MEMORIAL,
AND THEN JUST A FEW MINUTES AWAY
AT THE PARLIAMENT BUILDING THERE
WERE SHOOTINGS A FEW MINUTES
LATER.
IT'S NOT CLEAR IF THERE WAS ONE
SHOOTER, TWO SHOOTERS, THREE
SHOOTERS, BUT IT DOES APPEAR THE
PERSON WHO DID THE SHOOTING AT
THE WAR MEMORIAL RAN TOWARD THE
PARLIAMENT BUILDING.
THE PERSON WHO DID THE SHOOTING
IN THE PARLIAMENT BUILDING WAS
SHOT DEAD IN THE HALL OF HONOR.
YOU WALK IN THE FRONT DOOR OF
THE PARLIAMENT BUILDING AND THAT
HALL RIGHT THERE.
>> Ifill: SHOT BY THE SERGEANT
AT ARMS, WE UNDERSTAND.
>> SHOT BY THE SERGEANT AT ARMS.
THAT'S A CEREMONIAL POSITION,
BUT HE'S ALSO THE HEAD OF
SECURITY, AND HE'S A FORMER
ROYAL CANADIAN MOUNTED POLICE
OFFICER, SO HE WAS THE MAN WHO
SHOT THE SUSPECT.
>> Ifill: DO WE KNOW IF THERE
IS A CONNECTION BETWEEN WHAT
HAPPENED TODAY AND WHAT HAPPENED
IN MONTREAL NOT TOO LONG AGO?
>> NO, WE DON'T.
ON MONDAY THERE WAS A
HIT-AND-RUN OF TWO SOLDIERS, SO
THEY WERE ALSO SOLDIERS.
ONE OF THEM WAS KILLED, AND THEN
THE ASSAILANT, THE PERSON WHO
RAN OVER THESE TWO SOLDIERS WAS
SHOT BY POLICE.
AND WHAT WE'VE LEARNED ABOUT
THAT IS, YOU KNOW, STILL A
LITTLE VAGUE, BUT WE UNDERSTOOD
IT TO BE MAN WHO WAS INSPIRED BY
ISIS IDEOLOGY BUT WAS A BIT OF A
LONE WOLF.
THERE WAS NO CONNECTION THAT WE
KNEW OF TO A CELL, TO AN
ORGANIZATION.
HE WAS INSPIRED BY THE IDEOLOGY.
SO NOW IT'S VERY UNUSUAL TO SAY
THE LEAST THAT TWO DAYS LATER
THERE IS ANOTHER ATTACK.
IT WAS BELIEVED THAT THERE
WASN'T ANY CONNECTION TO OTHERS
IN MONDAY'S ATTACK, SO NOW
ANOTHER ONE IS CERTAINLY
PERPLEXING POLICE OFFICERS AND
OBSERVERS HERE.
>> Ifill: THERE HAVE BEEN
REPORTS ON AND OFF ALL DAY ABOUT
THERE BEING MORE THAN ONE
SHOOTER.
DO WE KNOW WHETHER THAT'S TRUE?
>> IT HASN'T BEEN CONFIRMED BY
THE POLICE.
I CAN TELL YOU THE POLICE WERE
CERTAINLY ACTING LIKE THEY
THOUGHT THERE WAS ANOTHER
SHOOTER.
THE DOWNTOWN AREA OF OTTAWA FOR
THE FOUR BLOCKS SOUTH WAS SHUT.
POLICE WERE RUNNING UP AND DOWN
THOSE STREETS TELLING PEOPLE,
GET BACK, STAY AWAY FROM THE
BUILDINGS, AND THIS IS HOURS
AFTER THE INITIAL SHOOTING,
SAYING GET BACK.
THEY WERE LOOKING UP AT THE
ROOFS AS THOUGH THEY THOUGHT
THERE WAS A GUNMAN ON THE ROOF.
SO THEY CERTAINLY WERE ACTING AS
THOUGH THEY THOUGHT THERE WAS
SOMEONE ELSE.
THEY WERE SEARCHING BUILDINGS.
BUT AS YET THE POLICE HAVE NOT
CONFIRMED WHETHER THERE WERE
OTHER SHOOTERS.
EARLIER IN THE DAY THEY WERE
TALKING ABOUT TWO, POSSIBLY
THREE SHOOTERS.
IT'S NOT CLEAR WHETHER THAT IS
THE CASE NOW.
>> IT'S VERY UNUSUAL TO HEAR OF
REPORTS LIKE THIS COMING FROM
CANADA.
HAS THERE BEEN AN UNUSUALLY
TENSE REACTION AMONG PEOPLE ON
THE STREETS IN OTTAWA
ESPECIALLY?
>> WELL, THIS IS VERY UNUSUAL IN
OTTAWA, AND, YES, THERE'S BEEN A
TENSE REACTION.
I THINK PEOPLE ARE, YOU KNOW,
AFRAID, TENSE, CONCERNED.
OTTAWA IS A QUIET TOWN.
IT'S A CITY OF LESS THAN A
MILLION PEOPLE.
IT'S THE CAPITAL, BUT IT'S A
QUIET CAPITAL.
IT'S NOT AN AREA WITH HEAVY
SECURITY.
IT'S IN THE LIKE WASHINGTON,
D.C.
THE PARLIAMENT BUILDINGS DON'T
HAVE THAT KIND OF ARMED FEELING,
EVEN THOUGH THERE'S SECURITY
THERE AND HEAVY SECURITY.
BUT IT DOESN'T HAVE THAT KIND OF
FEELING, AND CERTAINLY PEOPLE
ARE SURPRISED THAT WOULD HAPPEN
IN THIS CITY.
>> Ifill: WE EACH KEEP
FOLLOWING THE STORY AS IT
UNFOLDS.
CAMPBELL CLARK OF "THE GLOBE AND
MAIL," THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Woodruff: IN OTHER NEWS OF
THIS DAY, A FEDERAL JURY
CONVICTED FOUR FORMER SECURITY
GUARDS TODAY OF SHOOTING MORE
THAN 30 IRAQIS IN BAGHDAD, IN
2007.
14 OF THE VICTIMS DIED.
THE GUARDS, ALL OF THEM
AMERICAN, WORKED FOR THE FORMER
BLACKWATER SECURITY FIRM,
PROTECTING U.S. DIPLOMATS.
THEY SAID THEY ACTED IN SELF-
DEFENSE.
THE CHARGES RANGED FROM FIRST-
DEGREE MURDER TO MANSLAUGHTER.
>> Ifill: AMERICAN JEFFREY FOWLE
RETURNED HOME TODAY, AFTER BEING
DETAINED IN NORTH KOREA FOR
NEARLY SIX MONTHS.
FOWLE LANDED AT WRIGHT-PATTERSON
AIR FORCE BASE NEAR DAYTON, OHIO
EARLY THIS MORNING.
HE WAS MET BY HIS WIFE, THREE
CHILDREN AND OTHER RELATIVES,
WHO RUSHED TO EMBRACE HIM ON THE
TARMAC.
FROM THERE, THEY DROVE HOME,
WHERE FOWLE ISSUED A BRIEF
STATEMENT THROUGH HIS LAWYER.
>> JEFF WOULD LIKE YOU TO KNOW
THAT HE WAS TREATED WELL BY THE
GOVERNMENT OF THE D.P.R.K. AND
THAT HE'S CURRENTLY IN GOOD
HEALTH.
THE PAST 24 HOURS HAVE BEEN A
WHIRLWIND FOR JEFF AND HIS
FAMILY.
JEFF NEEDS SOME TIME RIGHT NOW
>> Ifill: FOWLE WAS ARRESTED IN
NORTH KOREA LAST MAY FOR LEAVING
A BIBLE AT A NIGHT CLUB.
TWO OTHER AMERICANS ARE STILL
IMPRISONED IN THE COMMUNIST
STATE.
>> Woodruff: THE SECRET SERVICE
IS FACING NEW CRITICISM FOR
DIVERTING AGENTS FROM PATROLLING
AROUND THE WHITE HOUSE TO HELP A
CO-WORKER WITH A  NEIGHBORHOOD
DISPUTE.
THE AGENTS WERE SENT OUT TO A
MARYLAND SUBURB SEVERAL TIMES IN
2011.
TODAY, THE INSPECTOR GENERAL OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY LABELED THE INCIDENT A
SERIOUS LAPSE IN JUDGMENT.
OFFICIAL AUTOPSY RESULTS HAVE
EMERGED IN THE SHOOTING OF A
TEENAGER.
THE AUTOPSY SHOWED MICHAEL BROWN
WAS SHOT IN THE HAND AT CLOSE
RANGE BY A WHITE POLICE OFFICER.
THE OFFICER HAS SAID BROWN
REACHED INTO HIS VEHICLE AND
TRIED TO GRAB HIS GUN.
SOME WITNESSES HAVE SAID BROWN
HAD HIS HANDS RAISED WHEN HE WAS
KILLED.
>> Ifill: SOME 60 MILLION
AMERICANS WILL SEE ANOTHER SMALL
INCREASE IN SOCIAL SECURITY
BENEFITS NEXT YEAR, JUST 1.7%.
THE ANNUAL COST-OF-LIVING
ADJUSTMENT WAS ANNOUNCED TODAY.
FOR 2015
THE ANNUAL COST OF LIVING
ADJUSTMENT WAS ANNOUNCED TODAY.
FOR 2015, THE CHANGE WORKS OUT
TO AN AVERAGE OF ABOUT $20 MORE
EACH MONTH.
IT'S THE THIRD STRAIGHT YEAR OF
AN INCREASE THAT'S LESS THAN 2%.
>> Woodruff: WALL STREET BROKE A
FOUR-DAY RALLY AFTER OIL PRICES
DROPPED AGAIN, AND PULLED DOWN
ENERGY STOCKS.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 153 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
16,461; THE NASDAQ FELL 36
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 4,382; AND
THE S&P 500 SLIPPED 14, TO
1,927.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR.
THE GOVERNORS RACES TO WATCH
THIS YEAR.
SIX THINGS THAT SHOULD CAUSE
MORE CONCERN THAN EBOLA.
THE STATE DEPARTMENT FIGHTS
ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS ON
SOCIAL MEDIA.
REMEMBERING WASHINGTON POST
EDITOR BEN BRADLEE.
WHY MORE COMPANIES ARE GIVING
WOMEN THE OPTION TO DELAY
MOTHERHOOD BY FREEZING THEIR
EGGS.
AND, ONE AUTHOR'S REMEDIES FOR
AMERICAN LITERATURE AND
DEMOCRACY.
>> Woodruff: AND NOW TO
POLITICS, SO MUCH OF THE
ATTENTION DURING THESE MIDTERM
ELECTIONS HAS BEEN FOCUSED ON
WHO WILL CONTROL THE SENATE, BUT
THERE'S A STORY DEVELOPING WHEN
IT COMES TO GOVERNORS.
OF THE 36 GUBERNATORIAL RACES
ACROSS THE COUNTRY, 12 SITTING
GOVERNORS ARE AT RISK OF LOSING.
IF THAT WERE TO HAPPEN, IT WOULD
BE THE MOST IN HALF A CENTURY.
HERE TO EXPLAIN IT ALL IS
NEWSHOUR'S POLITICAL EDITOR
DOMENICO MONTANARO.
SO HALF A CENTURY.
YOU'RE SAYING IT'S UNUSUAL TO
HAVE THIS MANY SEATS AT RISK.
>> IT'S VERY UNUSUAL.
JUST LIKE HOUSE MEMBERS AND
MEMBERS OF THE SENATE, GOVERNORS
REALLY USUALLY HAVE VERY HIGH
INCUMBENCY REELECTION RATES.
WHEN YOU LOOK OVER THE PAST 20
YEARS, THERE'S BEEN 88% OF
GOVERNORS WHO HAVE RUN FOR
REELECTION WHO ARE REELECTED.
IN FACT, YOU CAN SEE THREE TIMES
IN THE PAST 20 YEARS OR SO
YOU'VE HAD 100% REELECTION RATE.
SO IT'S VERY UNUSUAL WHAT'S
HAPPENING NOW.
IT COULD BE AS LOW AS 57% IF ALL
12 OF THOSE GOVERNORS LOSE.
I MEAN, THIS HASN'T HAPPENED
SINCE 1962 WHERE YOU'VE HAD 11
GOVERNORS LOSE BACK THEN.
NOW, EVEN IF HALF OF THOSE
GOVERNORS WERE TO WIN AND YOU
LOSE, WIND UP WITH SIX SITTING
GOVERNORS, THAT'S THE WORST THAT
WE'VE HAD IN A QUARTER CENTURY.
1990 WAS THE LAST TIME AS MANY
AS SIX HAVE LOST.
>> Woodruff: SO THIS RACE
RAISES THE QUESTION: WHY?
WHY IS IT HAPPENING THIS YEAR?
YOU'VE DIVIDED THE GOVERNORS UP
IN DIFFERENT GROUPS STARTING
WITH TEA PARTY REPUBLICANS.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THERE ARE THREE BIG REASONS
OVERARCHING FOR.
THIS WE'RE TALKING IDEOLOGY,
ECONOMICS AND NUMBERS.
YOU MENTIONED THE TEA PARTY
REPUBLICAN GOVERNORS WHO HAVE
RUN.
YOU KNOW, THERE'S THE OLD AXIOM
IN POLITICAL REPORTING THAT ALL
POLITICS IS LOCAL, BUT IT'S
TURNING OUT THAT A LOT OF THESE
FOLKS, ALL POLITICS IS TURNING
OUT TO BE NATIONAL BECAUSE YOU
HAVE PEOPLE LIKE SAM BROWNBACK
IN KANSAS, TOM CORBETT IN
PENNSYLVANIA, PAULA PAGE IN
MAINE WHO ARE SWEPT IN, IN 2010
DURING THAT TEA PARTY WAVE, WHO
REALLY RODE THAT WAVE TO
VICTORY, AND THIS TIME AROUND
THEY'RE EXPERIENCING SOME
BACKLASH AND SEEMING TO GOVERN
MORE IDEALOGICALLY.
USUALLY A GIVE'S SEAT IS PLACE
WHERE PEOPLE WHO ARE MANAGERS
CAN GET STUFF DONE.
THAT'S WHY IT'S BEEN A VERY GOOD
LAUNCHING PAD FOR THE PRESIDENCY
AS OPPOSED TO SENATORS.
>> SOME OF THESE RACES HAVE
GOTTEN VERY NASTY.
WE WERE TALKING ABOUT FLORIDA
EARLIER.
>> NO QUESTION ABOUT IT.
THE FLORIDA GIVE'S RACE, YOU'VE
SEEN A HIGH LEVEL OF NASTINESS.
BUT THERE ARE OTHER GOVERNORS,
REPUBLICANS, WHO ARE IN TROUBLE,
AND WE TALK ABOUT ECONOMICS.
THREE OF THE GOVERNORS WHO ARE
IN JEOPARDY HERE, YOU CAN SEE
NATHAN BEAL, RICK SNYDER AND
SEAN PARNELL IN ALASKA, THEY
EACH HAVE SOME OF THEIR OWN
ISSUES.
BEAL DEALINGS WITH ETHICS,
SNIDER IN A BLUE STATE GENERALLY
AND SEAN PARNELL HAS THIS WEIRD
INDEPENDENT THING THAT'S
HAPPENING.
BUT ALL THREE OF THOSE STATES
HAVE UNEMPLOYMENT RATES HIGHER
THAN THE NATIONAL AVERAGE AND
SIX OF THESE 11 GOVERNORS ARE
DEALING WITH ECONOMIES THAT ARE
DOING WORSE THAN THE COUNTRY AT
LARGE.
>> Woodruff: NOW THERE ARE
SOME DEMOCRATS WHO ARE IN
TROUBLE, AS WELL.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
WE'VE SEEN FOUR OF THOSE
DEMOCRATS, IN FACT, ONE OF THE
DEMOCRATS, ONE OF THE GOVERNORS
IS A DEMOCRAT WHO HAS ALREADY
LOST, AND THAT'SFIELD
ABERCROMBIE, AS YOU CAN SEE ON
YOUR SCREEN, DAN MILLOY IN
CONNECTICUT AND PAT QUINN IN
ILLINOIS ALSO AT RISK OF LOSING.
AND THIS IS AN UNPRECEDENTED
THING TO SEE THIS MANY GOVERNORS
IN ONE PLACE.
>> Woodruff: ONE POINT WE WERE
TALKING ABOUT EARLIER TODAY IS
HOW MANY GOVERNORS ARE RUNNING
FOR REELECTION SURPRISING WHEN
THE VOTERS ARE SO SOUR ABOUT
WHAT'S GOING ON IN GOVERNMENT
THAT SO MANY OF THEM WANT TO
KEEP THEIR JOBS.
>> THAT'S ANOTHER PART OF.
THIS YOU SAW SOME OF THE...
THERE WERE 24 OF THESE GOVERNORS
WHO CAME INTO OFFICE IN 2010.
28 OVERALL ARE RUNNING FOR
REELECTION.
THAT'S MORE THAN WE'VE SEEN
SINCE AT LEAST 1960.
SO WHEN YOU HAVE THAT MANY
PEOPLE RUNNING, OF COURSE THERE
WILL BE MORE TARGETS.
>> Woodruff: ALL RIGHT,
DOMENICO MONTANARO, THANK YOU.
WE'RE WATCHING IT.
>> Ifill: THE CENTERS FOR
DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION
NOW SAYS EVERYONE WHO RETURNS TO
THE U.S. FROM WEST AFRICA WILL
BE MONITORED FOR 21 DAYS-- THE
INCUBATION PERIOD FOR THE VIRUS.
THAT ANNOUNCEMENT COINCIDED WITH
THE FIRST DAY ON THE JOB FOR THE
NEW WHITE HOUSE EBOLA
COORDINATOR.
RON KLAIN WAS NAMED "EBOLA
RESPONSE COORDINATOR" FRIDAY,
AND APPEARED FOR HIS FIRST
OFFICIAL DAY AT WORK AT A WHITE
HOUSE MEETING WITH THE
PRESIDENT.
>> WHAT WE'RE SEEING IS THAT THE
PUBLIC HEALTH, INFRASTRUCTURE
AND SYSTEMS THAT WE ARE NOW
PUTTING IN PLACE ACROSS THE
BOARD AROUND THE COUNTRY SHOULD
GIVE THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
CONFIDENCE THAT WE'RE GOING TO
BE IN A POSITION TO DEAL WITH
ANY ADDITIONAL CASES OF EBOLA
THAT MIGHT CROP UP WITHOUT IT
TURN ENTERING AN OUTBREAK.
>> Ifill: AMONG THE CHANGES IN
THE U.S. RESPONSE TO THE CRISIS:
SECURITY WORKERS AT FIVE MAJOR
U.S. AIRPORTS ARE NOW SCREENING
PASSENGERS FROM LIBERIA, SIERRA
LEONE AND GUINEA.
THE NEW MONITORING ANNOUNCED
TODAY, BEGINS NEXT MONDAY IN NEW
YORK, NEW JERSEY, PENNSYLVANIA,
MARYLAND, VIRGINIA, AND GEORGIA.
THEY ARE THE DESTINATIONS OF 70%
OF TRAVELERS FROM WEST AFRICA'S
EBOLA ZONE.
MEANWHILE, AN AMERICAN FREELANCE
CAMERAMAN WHO CONTRACTED EBOLA
IN LIBERIA WAS DISCHARGED TODAY
FROM A HOSPITAL IN OMAHA,
NEBRASKA.
DOCTORS SAY ASHOKA MUKPO IS
CURED.
>> THERE'S NO GREATER REWARD
THAN TO TAKE A PATIENT WITH A
CRITICALLY ILL SERIOUS MEDICAL
ILLNESS AND MAKE THEM BETTER AND
WE'VE DONE THAT.
>> Ifill: BUT A NEW SCARE AROSE
TUESDAY IN NEWARK, NEW JERSEY AS
AMBULANCES RACED TO THE AIRPORT
TO PICK UP A LIBERIAN MAN
REPORTED TO BE SHOWING SYMPTOMS
OF EBOLA, BUT THAT WAS A FALSE
ALARM.
GOVERNOR CHRIS CHRISTIE SAYS
THEY FOLLOWED PROTOCOL.
>> HE IS NOW ASYMPTOMATIC.
THERE IS NO INDICATION AT THIS
POINT THAT HE HAS BEEN INFECTED
WITH THE VIRUS.
>> Ifill: DOZENS OF EBOLA
SURVIVORS IN SIERRA LEONE WERE
ALSO RELEASED FROM A TREATMENT
CENTER, VIRUS-FREE.
THEY RECEIVED CERTIFICATES
SHOWING THEY'RE NOW HEALTHY.
ALL TOLD, THE WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION REPORTED TODAY
EBOLA HAS KILLED MORE THAN 4,800
PEOPLE IN WEST AFRICA OUT OF
NEARLY 10,000 CASES.
STILL, THE HEAD OF THE
INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS ARGUED
TODAY AGAINST CLOSING BORDERS OR
BANNING TRAVEL.
>> IT CREATES A LOT OF FEAR AND
EXTREME PANIC THAT SOMETIMES
LEADS TO VERY IRRATIONAL TYPE OF
BEHAVIORS AND MEASURES, LIKE
CLOSING BORDERS, CANCELING
FLIGHTS, ISOLATING COUNTRIES,
THOSE ARE NOT SOLUTIONS.
>> Ifill: THE OFFICIAL SAID HE
BELIEVES THE EPIDEMIC CAN BE
CONTAINED WITHIN FOUR TO SIX
MONTHS.
AND THE RACE TO FIND A VACCINE
CONTINUED.
TWO COMPANIES, GLAXO SMITH KLINE
AND JOHNSON & JOHNSON SAID TODAY
THEY'RE DISCUSSING A POSSIBLE
COLLABORATION.
>> Ifill: THE GOVERNMENT'S
LATEST STEPS ILLUSTRATE AGAIN
JUST HOW MUCH ANXIETY REMAINS
ABOUT THE PROSPECT OF EBOLA'S
SPREAD.
BUT AS PUBLIC HEALTH OFFICIALS
CONTINUE TO EMPHASIZE, THE REAL
RISK TO MOST AMERICANS REMAINS
SMALL.
IN FACT, THERE ARE A NUMBER OF
OTHER ILLNESSES THAT CONTINUE TO
POSE BIGGER THREATS.
WE OUTLINED SOME OF THOSE
CONCERNS ONLINE AND IT ATTRACTED
A GREAT DEAL OF PUBLIC INTEREST.
SO WE DECIDED TO PROVIDE THAT
CONTEXT ON OUR BROADCAST AS
WELL.
HARI SREENIVASAN RECORDED THIS
CONVERSATION IN OUR NEW YORK
STUDIOS.
>> Sreenivasan: TO GET MORE
INFORMATION AND PERSPECTIVE ON
THIS NOW FROM DR. WILLIAM
SHAFFNER, AN INFECTIOUS DISEASE
EXPERT JOINING US FROM
NASHVILLE.
FIRST OFF, THERE WERE QUITE A
FEW CASES WE HEARD OUT A FEW
MONTHS AGO ABOUT ENTEROVIRUS
D-68.
THIS WAS SOMETHING THAT WAS
DISCOVERED IN THE '60s, BUT
THIS IS REALLY FIRST OUTBREAK
THAT WE'VE HAD.
YEAH, HARI, IT'S A VERY LARGE
OUTBREAK.
IT'S RUN ACROSS THE ENTIRE
COUNTRY.
CHILDREN, MANY OF THEM, HAVE
BEEN AFFECTED.
SOME CHILDREN HAD DIFFICULTY
BREATHING AND ASTHMA ATTACKS.
AND NOW THERE'S EVEN A QUESTION
ABOUT WHETHER THIS VIRUS IS
CAPABLE OF PRODUCING A PARALYTIC
ILLNESS.
THAT'S STILL UNDER
INVESTIGATION.
BUT THAT WAS A BIG SURPRISE THAT
CAME UPON US, YES.
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY.
THEN SOMETHING THAT WE THOUGHT
WAS LONG GONE, MEASLES.
WE'VE KIND OF SEEN A REEMERGENCE
OF MEASLES, ALMOST 600 CASES
THIS YEAR.
>> YEAH.
CAN YOU IMAGINE THAT?
THAT'S BECAUSE THERE'S STILL
MEASLES OUT IN THE WORLD, BUT
OUR PARENTS, MANY OF THEM, ARE
WITHHOLDING THEIR CHILDREN FROM
VACCINATION, AND SO WHEN SOMEONE
WITH MEASLES COMES INTO THIS
COUNTRY, IT CAN SPREAD AMONG OUR
OWN CHILDREN, CAUSING A WHOLE
LOT OF ILLNESS.
ILLNESS THAT WE THOUGHT WAS LONG
GONE AND ACTUALLY YOU KNOW
BEFORE WE HAD MEASLES VACCINE,
MEASLES CAUSED 400 TO 500 DEATHS
OF OUR CHILDREN EACH YEAR.
WE'RE LETTING DOWN OUR GUARD A
LITTLE BIT THERE.
>> Sreenivasan: SO HOW
CONCERNED SHOULD WE BE ABOUT
WHOOPING COUGH OR PERTUSSIS
MAKING A COMEBACK?
>> YES, IT'S BACK.
WE ALL THOUGHT IT HAD
DISAPPEARED.
THAT'S DUE TO TWO THINGS REALLY,
HARI.
THE FIRST IS THE VACCINE WE'RE
USING IS EXCELLENT SHORT-TERM
PROTECTION, BUT THEN THE
PROTECTION BEGINS TO WANE.
THEN ALSO SOME PARENTS ARE
WITHHOLDING THEIR CHILDREN FROM
VACCINATION, SO WE HAVE MORE
SUSPECTABLES AND NOW WHOOPING
COUGH IS SPREADING, PARTICULARLY
AMONG ADOLESCENTS AND YOUNG
ADULTS.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW
SIGNIFICANTLY SHOULD WE BE
CONCERNED ABOUT ANTIBIOTIC
RESISTANT BACTERIA?
>> WELL, THAT'S THE BANE OF
INFECTIOUS DISEASE DOCTORS SUCH
AS MYSELF.
THE BACTERIA, NOT THE PERSON,
THE BACTERIA BECOME RESISTANT,
SO THAT MEANS WE HAVE FEWER
ANTIBIOTICS THAT WORK.
THAT'S, OF COURSE, A CONSEQUENCE
OF THE WIDESPREAD, OFTEN OVERUSE
OF ANTIBIOTICS THAT WE'RE
RESPONSIBLE FOR IN MEDICINE AND
PARENTS OFTEN EXPECT AS WELL AS
THE USE OF ANTIBIOTICS WHEN WE
RAISE ANIMALS FOR FOOD.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE WAS AN
EXCELLENT "FRONTLINE" ON THAT
TOPIC RECENTLY.
WHAT ABOUT THE COMMON FLU?
THIS IS FLU SEASON.
PEOPLE ARE GETTING VACCINATED OR
GETTING THE SHOT AT THEIR
OFFICES OR AT SMALL CLINICS.
THAT KILLS I WANT TO SAY
THOUSANDS, TENS OF THOUSANDS OF
PEOPLE EVERY YEAR.
>> TO MANY PEOPLE FLU IS ALMOST
MUNDANE BECAUSE IT IS SO
WELL-KNOWN AND IT COMES UPON US
ANNUALLY, BUT INFLUENZA CAUSES
ALMOST 200,000 HOSPITALIZATIONS
EACH YEAR.
IT CAN STRIKE NORMAL, HEALTHY
PEOPLE AND PUT THEM IN THE
INTENSIVE CARE UNIT, AND
DEPENDING UPON THE SEVERITY OF
THE SEASON, SOMEWHERE BETWEEN
4,000 AND ALMOST 40,000 DEATHS
EACH YEAR.
SO FLU IS TO BE RECKONED WITH,
AND IF I CAN GET IN A PUNCH
LINE, IF YOU HAVEN'T BEEN
VACCINATED AGAINST INFLUENZA,
VIEWERS, PLEASE DO SO.
IT'S OUR BEST PROTECTION AGAINST
INFLUENZA.
>> WE LIST ALL THESE DISEASES
THAT HAVE INCREDIBLY DEVASTATING
EFFECTS AROUND THE COUNTRY, BUT
THE PERCEPTION AND THE FEAR OF
GETTING EBOLA SEEMS TO HAVE
SWEPT THE NATION HERE.
I MEAN, THE HARVARD SCHOOL OF
PUBLIC HEALTH RECENTLY DID A
PUBLIC OPINION POLL.
85% OF PEOPLE RESPONDING OUT OF
1,000 AVERAGE CITIZENS.
THEY THOUGHT THEY COULD GET
EBOLA FROM SOMEONE NEXT TO THEM
COUGHING OR SNEEZING.
YET EVERY DOCTOR WE HAVE ON THIS
PROGRAM AND MANY OTHERS SAY
ABSOLUTELY NOT.
>> YOU KNOW, THAT EBOLA ANXIETY,
WE MIGHT CALL IT, IS REAL AND
NEEDS TO BE ADDRESSED AND BY
HAVING CAREFUL CONVERSIONSAT
SUCH AS WE'RE HAVING IS VERY,
VERY HELPFUL.
EBOLA IS NEW, MYSTERIOUS,
FIERCE.
IT HAS A VERY HIGH MORTALITY
RATE.
AND PEOPLE FEEL A LACK OF
CONTROL.
THERE'S NOTHING THEY CAN DO
ABOUT IT.
THEY CAN GET VACCATEDIN AGAINST
FLU, BUT THEY FEEL PUT UPON.
I'VE EVEN SPOKEN TO SOME PEOPLE
WHO SEEM INDIGNANT THAT
SOMETHING LIKE EBOLA COULD EVEN
COME TO THE UNITED STATES IN THE
21st CENTURY.
SO PEOPLE HAVE A HARD TIME JUST
LEARNING ABOUT THIS AND KIND OF
INTEGRATING IT INTO THE THOUGHT
PROCESS.
IN THE MEANTIME, THEY HAVE A LOT
OF ANXIETY ABOUT IT.
>> IS IT JUST THAT FEAR
INHERENTLY IS IRRATIONAL?
I SAW CABLE NEWS TODAY WHERE
PEOPLE WERE... THE REPORTER WAS
TALKING TO TWO INDIVIDUALS WHO
HAD SAT THREE SEATS OVER OR
THREE ROWS AWAY FROM THE
PASSENGER WHO GOT ON AN
AIRPLANE.
THEY WERE SO CONCERNED ABOUT THE
POSSIBILITY OF CATCHING EBOLA
FROM THAT INDIVIDUAL, FROM THAT
DISTANCE, THAT THEY HAD
QUARANTINED THEMSELVES.
>> WELL, I'DIKE L NOT TO CALL IT
IRRATIONAL.
WHEN PEOPLE ARE JUST LEARNING
ABOUT SOMETHING, SOMETHING THAT
THEY REGARD AS A THREAT, AND
THEY HAVEN'T INTEGRATED ALL THIS
INFORMATION STILL ENTER THEIR
THOUGHT PROCESS, THEIR SENSE OF
ANXIETY OBVIOUSLY INCREASES.
AND WE NEED TO PROVIDE BOTH
EDUCATION AND REASSURANCE, AND
WE NEED TO BE VERY CLEAR IN OUR
MESSAGES.
SO PEOPLE CAN BECOME USED TO
THIS.
>> ALL RIGHT.
DR. WILLIAM SHAFFNER JOINING US
FROM VANDERBILT UNIVERSITY
MEDICAL CENTER IN NASHVILLE.
THANKS FOR YOUR TIME.
>> MY PLEASURE, HARI.
>> Ifill: LATE YESTERDAY, WORD
CAME THAT THREE TEENAGE GIRLS
FROM THE DENVER AREA WERE
DETAINED IN GERMANY OVER THE
WEEKEND BY AMERICAN AUTHORITIES.
THE TEENS, NOW RETURNED HOME,
WERE ALLEGEDLY ON THEIR WAY TO
SYRIA, TO JOIN THE ISLAMIC STATE
GROUP.
THE MILITANTS HAVE BEEN LURING
RECRUITS WORLDWIDE WITH A
SOPHISTICATED WEB-BASED, MEDIA
OPERATION, A PROGRAM WHICH THE
U.S. GOVERNMENT IS NOW
TARGETING.
CHIEF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
CORRESNDENPOT MARGARET WARNER
HAS THE STORY.
>> Warner: THE ISLAMIC STATE
GROUP'S SWEEPING  LAND GRABS
ACROSS SYRIA AND IRAQ THIS YEAR
HAVE BEEEN MATCHED BY AN ONLINE
ONSLAUGHT AS WELL.
THE GROUP POSTS VIDEOS
DOCUMENTING ITS BRUTALITY, THE
KILLINGS OF SOLDIERS,
JOURNALISTS, AID WORKERS AND
CITIZENS BEHEADINGS, AND TOUTING
ITS MILITARY VICTORIES.
THIS ONE YESTERDAY, SHOWED U.S.
MILITARY EQUIPMENT AIR-DROPPED
SUNDAY TO KURDS FIGHTING ISIS IN
THE SYRIAN TOWN OF KOBANI BUT
CAPTURED BY THE JIHADIS.
OTHER POSTINGS OFFER IDYLLIC
VISIONS OF THE SO-CLED ALISLAMIC
CALIPHATE THE GROUP AIMS TO
BUILD ACROSS THE MIDDLE EAST.
MANY ARE IN ENGLISH, AIMED AT
POTENTIAL RECRUITS WELL BEYOND
THE U.S. GOVERNMENT VIEWS THIS
CAMPAIGN AS A MAJOR THREAT.
AS THE THEN-CHIEF OF THE
NATIONAL COUNTER TERRORISM
CENTER, MATTHEW OLSON, MADE
CLEAR.
ISIL DISSEMINATES TIMELY, HIGH-
QUALITY MEDIA CONTENT ON
MULTIPLE PLATFORMS, INCLUDING ON
SOCIAL MEDIA, DESIGNED TO SECURE
A WIDESPREAD FOLLOWING FOR THE
GROUP.
>> Warner: LAST MONTH, PRESIDENT
OBAMA URGED HIS FELLOW LEADERS
AT THE UNITED NATIONS TO JOIN
THE FIGHT AGAINST THE ISLAMIC
STATE IN THE REALM OF IDEAS.
>> THAT MEANS CONTESTING THE
SPACE THAT TERRORISTS OCCUPY,
INCLUDING THE INTERNET AND
SOCIAL MEDIA.
THEIR PROPAGANDA HAS COERCED
YOUNG PEOPLE TO TRAVEL ABROAD TO
FIGHT THEIR WARS, AND TURNED
>> Warner: THE U.S. STATE
DEPARTMENT HAS JUMPED IN ON THAT
EFFORT, WITH A VERY PUBLIC
ONLINE CAPAIGN ACROSS MULTIPLE
PLATFORMS.
ARABIC LANGUAGE VIDEOS ASSAILING
THE ISLAMIC STATE FACTION, TO
TIT-FOR-TAT FACEBOOK AND TWITTER
POST AGAINST ISIS SUPPORTERS.
IN A PROJECT DUBBED "THINK
AGAIN, TURN AWAY" AIMED AT
DISSUADING POTENTIAL ISIS
RECRUITS.
>> HERE AT THE STATE DEPARTMENT,
WORK IS GOING ON SINCE 2010.
THIS YEAR IT ADDED ENGLISH.
WE WEREN'T PERMITTED TO FILM THE
OPERATION CENTER, BUT WE WERE
ABLE TO CATCH UP WITH THE MAN
SPEARHEADING ITS LATEST EFFORTS.
FORMER "TIME" MAZIAGNE EDITOR
RICHARD STENGEL, THE UNDER
SECRETARY OF STATE FOR PUBLIC
DIPLOMACY.
>> WHAT ISIL IS DOING IT'S USING
SOCIAL MEDIA AND OTHER PLATFORMS
TO TRY TO GET MINDSHARE, PEOPLE
WHO WOULD BE SYMPATHETIC TO
THEIR GOALS, YOUNG MEN THAT
THEY'RE TRYING TO RECRUIT.
SO WHEN THE PRESIDENT TALKS
ABOUT CONTESTING A SPACE HE
MEANS GET IN THERE, BETWEEN ISIL
AND THOSE YOUNG MEN.
>> Warner: THE STATE DEPARTMENT
HAS WORKED TO PERSUADE ISLAMIC
GOVERNMENTS AND RELIGIOUS
LEADERS OVERSEAS TO JOIN THE
MESSAGING CAMPAIGN.
>> WE'RE NOT ALWAYS THE BEST
MESSENGER FOR OUR MASSES.
THAT DOESN'T MEAN WE SHOULDN'T
DO IT, BUT PART AND PARCEL OF
WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO DO IS TO
ENABLE THOSE BETTER MESSENGERS
THAN WE ARE.
THOSE PEOPLE WHO CAN SAY THIS IS
ILLEGITIMATE ISLAM.
>> Warner: BUT SOME OF THE STATE
DEPARTMENT EFFORTS HAVE PROVEN
CONTROVERSIAL, ESPECIALLY THIS
VIDEO ENTITLED "WELCOME TO
ISLAMIC STATE LAND," A
COLLECTION OF ISIS OWN GRUESOME
VIDEOS SARCASTICALLY LABELED
WITH LINES LIKE, "RUN, DO NOT
WALK TO ISIS LAND WHERE YOU CAN
LEARN USEFUL SKILLS BLOWING UP
MOSQUES, CRUCIFYING AND
EXECUTING MUSLIMS.
TRAVEL IS INEXPENSIVE BECAUSE
YOU WON'T NEED A RETURN TICKET."
IT WAS SLAMMED BY SOME CRITICS
AS OFFENSIVE BUT STENGEL MAKES
NO APOLOGIES.
>> SOME OF THE THINGS THAT WE DO
SAY IN THAT SPACE ARE THINGS
THAT MAKE PEOPLE UNCOMFORTABLE
BECAUSE IT'S A DARK SPACE.
AND TO CONTEST THE SPACE YOU
HAVE TO MIRROR SOME OF THE
THINGS PEOPLE ARE HEARING.
I DON'T THINK WE'RE GONNA APPEAL
TO THESE YOUNG MEN BY, YOU KNOW,
QUOTES FROM THOMAS JEFFERSON
ABOUT FREEDOM AND DEMOCRACY
EITHER.
SOMETIMES WHEN YOU LIE DOWN IN
THE MUD YOU GET MUD ON YOU, AND
THAT DOES HAPPEN.
>> THEY WERE DELIBERATELY
PLAYING TO A 21ST CENTURY, THE
LATEST GENERATION, MILLENIAL
GENERATION OF PEOPLE WHO ARE
WATCHING AND PICKING UP ON KIND
OF THE SNARK THAT'S IN THERE.
PHILLIP SMYTH, AN EXPERT ON
ISLAMIST MOVEMENTS AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, SAYS
THERE ARE PITFALLS TO THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT ENGAGING MORE
DIRECTLY IN SOCIAL MEDIA.
FOR ONE THING, IT'S HARD FOR A
GOVERNMENT TO MATCH THE JIHADIS'
AGILITY.
>> A LIE CAN MAKE ITS WAY HALF
WAY AROUND THE WORLD BEFORE THE
TRUTH CAN EVER GET ITS SHOES ON.
THEY CAN ACT MUCH MORE QUICKLY
THAN WE CAN BECAUSE WE HAVE TO
GO THROUGH A CHECKLIST OF WHAT
WE ARE GOING TO DO AND HOW WE'RE
GOING TO RESPOND.
>> Warner: ARE THERE LIMITATIONS
ON WHAT THE U.S. GOVERNMENT CAN
DO IN THAT SPACE, WHAT YOU CAN
SAY, THAT OTHER ACTORS OUT IN
THE SPACE DON'T HAVE?"
>> YES, OF COURSE THERE ARE
LIMITS TO WHAT WE CAN SAY.
I MEAN THEY'RE NOT BOUND BY
FIDELITY TO THE TRUTH, THEY'RE
NOT BOUND BY DEMOCRATIC VALUES,
THEY'RE NOT BOUND BY ANY OF THE
THINGS THAT WE ARE.
>> Warner: PHILLIP SMYTH VOICES
ANOTHER WIDE CRITICISM THAT BY
DIRECTLY ENGAGING WITH THE
MILITANTS IN DUELING POSTINGS,
THE U.S. GOVERNMENT JUST
ELEVATES THEIR STATURE.
>> A LOT OF THEM TAKE IT AS A
BADGE OF A SPECIAL BADGE OR A
SPECIAL MEDAL IF YOU WILL IN
KIND OF RECOGNITION FOR WHAT
THEY'VE DONE.
IF YOU'RE DOING COUNTER
MESSAGING STRATEGY, MAYBE AN
OFFICIAL ACCOUNT ISN'T ALWAYS
THE BEST WAY TO DO IT.
THERE WILL BE TIMES THAT YOU'RE
DEALING WITH PEOPLE THAT YOU
WOULDN'T NORMALLY WANT TO DEAL
WITH BUT THAT IS THE NATURE OF
THE EFFORT.
>> Warner: AND HOW EFFECTIVE IS
THIS CAMPAIGN?
CHARTING THAT IS A TRICKY
BUSINESS.
>> IF THE END GOAL IS TO TURN
PEOPLE AWAY FROM ENGAGING IN
TERRORISM, I MEAN, THERE HASN'T
REALLY BEEN ANY RESEARCH THAT'S
BEEN PUBLISHED THAT COULD SAY,
IT'S EFFECTIVE OR INEFFECTIVE.
>> Warner: STENGEL, WHILE
ADMITTING EFFECTIVENESS IS HARD
TO TRACK AND PROVE, HAS A QUICK
RESPONSE TO THAT.
>> IF YOU DO, IF YOU TURN ONE
YOUNG MAN AWAY, THINK OF THE
REPERCUSSIONS.
HE COULD HAVE PUT A ROADSIDE
BOMB SOMEWHERE.
HE COULD HAVE KILLED A FAMILY
SOMEWHERE IN IRAQ OR SYRIA.
I MEAN, IT'S INCALCULABLE THE
VALUE.
SO I WOULD SAY, YES, EVEN THOUGH
IT'S HARD TO MEASURE WHETHER
YOU'RE ACCOMPLISHING THAT, THE
FACT IS THE GOAL IS SO IMPORTANT
AND THE VALUE IS SO GREAT THAT
YOU CAN'T STOP DOING IT.
>> Woodruff: NOW, WE REMEMBER
ONE OF THE NATION'S MOST REVERED
NEWSMEN.
BEN BRADLEE WAS 93 WHEN HE DIED
OF NATURAL CAUSES YESTERDAY AT
HIS HOME IN WASHINGTON.
HE LEFT HIS MARK AS THE STEWARD
OF THE PRINCIPAL NEWSPAPER IN
THE NATION'S CAPITAL, SPANNING A
TUMULTUOUS PERIOD IN AMERICAN
POLITICAL LIFE.
>> Woodruff: BEN BRADLEE'S
CELEBRATED TENURE AT "THE
WASHINGTON POST" HELPED MAKE IT
ONE OF THE GREAT AMERICAN
NEWSPAPERS, AND THE ZEST HE
BROUGHT TO THE JOB NEVER LEFT
HIM, EVEN IN LATER YEARS.
>> IT CHANGES YOUR LIFE, THE
PURSUIT OF TRUTH.
AND AT LEAST, IF YOU KNOW THAT
YOU HAVE TRIED TO FIND THE TRUTH
AND GONE PAST THE FIRST APPARENT
TRUTH TOWARDS THE REAL TRUTH,
IT'S VERY EXCITING, I FIND.
>> Woodruff: BRADLEE WAS BORN IN
1921, TO A PRESTIGIOUS FAMILY IN
BOSTON, WHERE AS A TEENAGER, HE
DEVELOPED POLIO, BUT EVENTUALLY
RECOVERED.
AFTER SERVING IN THE NAVY IN
WORLD WAR II, HE BEGAN HIS
JOURNALISM CAREER WITH "THE NEW
HAMPSHIRE SUNDAY NEWS," BEFORE
GOING ON TO REPORTING JOBS WITH
"THE POST" AND "NEWSWEEK"
MAGAZINE.
ALONG THE WAY, HE BEFRIENDED
JOHN F. KENNEDY, ONE OF HIS
WASHINGTON NEIGHBORS, AND BECAME
A CLOSE CONFIDANT, AS KENNEDY
MOVED TO THE SENATE, AND
ULTIMATELY, THE WHITE HOUSE.
IN 1965, BRADLEE TOOK OVER AS
MANAGING EDITOR OF "THE POST,"
AND JUST THREE YEARS LATER,
EXECUTIVE EDITOR, IN WHAT BECAME
A FAMOUS COLLABORATION WITH
PUBLISHER KATHARINE GRAHAM.
TOGETHER, THEY DEFIED PRESIDENT
RICHARD NIXON, AND JOINED "THE
NEW YORK TIMES" IN PUBLISHING
THE PENTAGON PAPERS IN 1971.
>> YOU COULDN'T GET MUCH MORE
HOSTILE THAN THE NIXON
ADMINISTRATION WAS.
THERE HAVEN'T BEEN
ADMINISTRATIONS THAT LIKED
REPORTERS SINCE KENNEDY.
>> Woodruff: THE TROVE OF
CLASSIFIED DOCUMENTS EXPOSED THE
TORTURED HISTORY OF AMERICA'S
INVOLVEMENT IN VIETNAM AT A TIME
WHEN PUBLIC OPPOSITION TO THE
WAR WAS RISING.
THEN, IN JULY 1972, THE POST
BEGAN ITS PURSUIT OF THE
BURGLARY OF DEMOCRATIC PARTY
HEADQUARTERS AT THE WATERGATE
COMPLEX IN WASHINGTON.
BRADLEE ASSIGNED TWO YOUNG
REPORTERS, BOB WOODWARD AND CARL
BERNSTEIN, TO THE STORY, AND,
ALMOST ALONE AT FIRST, THEY
FOLLOWED A MONEY TRAIL THAT LED
FIRST TO THE PRESIDENT'S RE-
ELECTION COMMITTEE, AND
ULTIMATELY, TO THE WHITE HOUSE.
WOODWARD REFLECTED ON THAT TIME
RECENTLY, AT HIS HOME IN
WASHINGTON, AND RECALLED
BRADLEE'S FIRM GUIDANCE.
>> HE WAS GOOD NOT JUST BECAUSE
OF WHAT HE PUBLISHED AND ALLOWED
TO GO IN THE PAPER, BUT WHAT HE
KEPT OUT.
I CAN REMEMBER TIMES WHEN WE
WOULD SHOW HIM DRAFTS OF
STORIES.
HE'S JUST, "YOU HAVEN'T GOT IT
YET."
THAT DIDN'T MEAN, "WE'RE NOT
GOING TO RUN IT."
IT DIDN'T MEAN, "I DON'T BELIEVE
IT."
IT MEANT MORE WORK.
GO TALK TO MORE PEOPLE.
>> Woodruff: WOODWARD AND
BERNSTEIN'S REPORTING AND THE
MOUNTING WEIGHT OF OTHER
DISCLOSURES TRIGGERED A NATIONAL
POLITICAL CRISIS AND LED
FINALLY, TO PRESIDENT NIXON'S
RESIGNATION IN 1974.
NEARLY 30 YEARS LATER, BRADLEE
LOOKED BACK IN A NEWSHOUR
INTERVIEW.
>> I THINK IT MADE POLITICIANS
MORE SCARED OF LYING, BUT IT
SURE AS HELL DIDN'T STOP THEM.
AND I THINK IT WAS VERY GOOD FOR
"THE WASHINGTON POST."
>> Woodruff: IT ALSO PRODUCED A
BEST-SELLING BOOK, "ALL THE
PRESIDENT'S MEN," IN 1974.
AND TWO YEARS LATER, AN OSCAR-
WINNING FILM ADAPTATION CAME
OUT.
JASON ROBARDS PORTRAYED BRADLEE,
WINNING AN ACADEMY AWARD FOR
BEST SUPPORTING ACTOR.
ANOTHER CENTRAL FIGURE WAITED
UNTIL 2005 TO COME FORWARD, MARK
FELT, FORMER ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR
OF THE F.B.I. REVEALED HE'D BEEN
THE SOURCE KNOWN AS DEEP THROAT.
BRADLEE SPOKE ABOUT KEEPING THE
SECRET, IN ANOTHER NEWSHOUR
INTERVIEW.
>> IT OFFERS PROOF OF THE FACT
THAT ANONYMOUS STORIES,
ANONYMOUS SOURCES CAN BE HANDLED
PROPERLY AND BE USEFUL TO
SOCIETY, AND THAT WHEN YOU--
BEFORE YOU THROW REPORTERS IN
JAIL FOR KEEPING THEIR SOURCES
ANONYMOUS, YOU'D BETTER BE
CAREFUL.
>> Woodruff: LONG AFTER
WATERGATE, BRADLEE CONTINUED
PUSHING HIS BRAND OF JOURNALISM,
AND HIS STEWARDSHIP OF THE POST
HELPED BRING THE PAPER 23
PULITZER PRIZES.
AGAIN, BOB WOODWARD.
>> EVEN THOUGH IN THE 1970S AND
1980S THERE WAS NO INTERNET.
THERE WAS NO 24/7 CYCLE OF NEWS,
THERE WAS IN BEN BRADLEE'S HEAD.
IT WAS 24/7.
WHAT DO YOU GOT?
WHAT DO YOU KNOW?
ARE YOU SURE?
WE'RE GOING TO WORK ON THAT.
THERE WAS A KIND OF ENERGY THAT,
YOU KNOW, THERE WERE A LOT OF
WONDERFUL EDITORS AROUND BUT HE
WAS UNIQUE.
>> Woodruff: IT WAS A WIDELY
HELD ASSESSMENT.
JIM LEHRER WAS ONE OF BRADLEE'S
CLOSE PERSONAL FRIENDS.
>> HE WAS TRULY A PETER PAN.
YOU KNOW, HE DIDN'T WANT TO GROW
UP AND HE DIDN'T.
AND JOURNALISM WAS ALL ABOUT
STORIES.
HE WANTED STORIES WHERE
SOMETHING HAPPENED.
WHERE THERE WERE REAL PEOPLE
DOING THINGS AND HE WANTED THE
DETAILS, AND HE WANTED THE STORY
TO BE RIGHT.
>> Woodruff: BRADLEE STEPPED
DOWN AS THE POST'S EXECUTIVE
EDITOR IN 1991, BUT CONTINUED TO
SERVE AS VICE PRESIDENT AT
LARGE.
>> PEOPLE JUST WANTED TO COME TO
WORK AND BE AROUND BEN, YOU
KNOW, HE LIT UP A ROOM WHEN HE
CAME INTO IT.
>> Woodruff: BO JONES SERVED AS
A "WASHINGTON POST" EXECUTIVE
AND PUBLISHER DURING PART OF
BRADLEE'S TENURE.
>> HE WAS COMPLETELY GENUINE.
HE WAS APOLITICAL IN THE SENSE
THAT HE WOULD GO AFTER A STORY
WHEREVER IT CAME FROM, WHETHER
IT WAS FROM A DEMOCRAT,
REPUBLICAN, A LIBERAL OR
CONSERVATIVE REGARDLESS OF WHAT
IT WAS.
WHEN HE WENT HOME HE DIDN'T
UNLOAD WHAT HIS TRUE FEELINGS
WERE.
IT WAS WHAT HE WAS SAYING
CANDIDLY AT THE OFFICE.
>> Woodruff: LAST NOVEMBER,
BRADLEE WAS AWARDED THE
PRESIDENTIAL MEDAL OF FREEDOM,
THE NATION'S HIGHEST CIVILIAN
HONOR.
PRESIDENT OBAMA PRAISED HIM FOR
OPENING A NEW ERA OF
INVESTIGATIVE JOURNALISM, AND
REMINDING US THAT OUR FREEDOM AS
A NATION RESTS ON OUR FREEDOM OF
THE PRESS.
>> HE SHOULD BE REMEMBERED AS A
SPIRITUAL LEADER FOR GOOD
JOURNALISM.
A SPIRITUAL LEADER FOR
INDIVIDUALS WHO WANT TO PRACTICE
JOURNALISM.
A SPIRITUAL LEADER FOR GETTING
THAT EXTRA FACT AND WORKING JUST
A LITTLE BIT HARDER.
HE STOOD FOR AND STOOD BEHIND
REPORTING AS, IN AND OF ITSELF,
A KIND OF MAGIC WAY TO HAVE A
GOOD TIME AND AT THE SAME TIME
DO SOMETHING THAT REALLY
MATTERS.
HE SAW JOURNALISM AND THE
REPORTING PART OF JOURNALISM AS
REALLY IMPORTANT.
HE REALLY BELIEVED THAT THE
PUBLIC NEEDS TO KNOW EVERYTHING
AND THE ONLY WAY THEY'RE GOING
TO FIND OUT, IS IF THERE'S GOOD
REPORTING.
>> Woodruff: IN HIS FINAL YEARS,
BRADLEE'S WIFE, "WASHINGTON
POST" JOURNALIST SALLY QUINN,
SAYS HE BATTLED ALZHEIMER'S AND
DEMENTIA.
BEN BRADLEE WAS 93-YEARS-OLD.
>> Ifill: FOR DECADES, MEDICAL
ADVANCES HAVE MADE IT POSSIBLE
FOR WOMEN TO POSTPONE OR EXTEND
THEIR ABILITY TO HAVE CHILDREN.
NOW, TWO BIG TECH FIRMS, APPLE
AND FACEBOOK, SAY THEY WILL PAY
UP TO $20,000 TO ALLOW EMPLOYEES
TO FREEZE THEIR EGGS FOR LATER
FERTILIZATION.
THAT DECISION HAS SPARKED A FAIR
BIT OF CONVERSATION ABOUT THE
BENEFITS, RISKS AND CHOICES
WOMEN COULD FACE.
WE LOOK AT SOME OF THE QUESTIONS
THE PRACTICE IS RAISING, WITH:
SARAH ELIZABETH RICHARD, THE
AUTHOR OF "MOTHERHOOD
RESCHEDULED, THE NEW FRONTIER OF
EGG FREEZING AND THE WOMEN WHO
TRIED IT."
AND, ALTA CHARO, A PROFESSOR OF
LAW AND BIO-ETHICS AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN MADISON.
ALTA CHARO, I WONDER IF WE'RE
MOVING NOW FROM CHOICES BASED ON
HEALTH CONCERNS TO CHOICES BASED
ON HAVING GREATER OPTIONS.
>> IN A SENSE, YES, WE ARE.
EGG FREEZING WAS IMPORTANT FOR
WOMEN WHO HAD TO UNDERGO A
MEDICAL PREENING SUCH AS
CHEMOTHERAPY AND WHO WANTED TO
AT LEAST PRESERVE THE
POSSIBILITY OF HAVING CHILDREN
GENETICALLY OF THEIR OWN SOME
TIME IN THE FUTURE.
BUT THE PROSPECT OF WOMEN
BEGINNING TO DO THIS IN ORDER TO
SIMPLY PRESERVE THEIR FERTILITY
WHILE THEY ADVANCE THEIR CAREERS
IS A NEW PHENOMENON AND SOMEWHAT
MORE TROUBLING BECAUSE IT IS
SIMPLY NOT AS SUCCESSFUL AS
HAVING CHILDREN THROUGH ORDINARY
CONCEPTION OR EVEN TRUE ORDINARY
IN VITRO FERTILIZATION AND
FREEZING YOUR EMBRYOS.
>> Ifill: SARA'S KOSHER PIZZA,
-- SARAH ELIZABETH
RICHARD, YOU'VE WRITTEN A BOOK
ABOUT THIS, "MOTHERHOOD
RESCHEDULED: THE NEW FRONTIER OF
EGG FREEZING AND THE WOMEN WHO
TRIED IT".
WHAT ARE THE OPTIONS FOR WOMEN
HERE?
>> IT'S GREAT THAT COMPANIES ARE
COVERING IT AND MAKES THE OPTION
AVAILABLE FOR WOMEN WHO WOULDN'T
HAVE PAID FOR IT ON THEIR OWN OR
DIDN'T HAVE THE OPTION TO PAY
FOR IT.
SO THEY'LL HAVE MORE
OPPORTUNITIES TO HAVE CHILDREN.
THAT SAID, THIS IS UNCHARTERED
TERRITORY BECAUSE FIRST WAVE OF
WOMEN WHO FROZE THEIR EGGS
PRETTY MUCH FROZE BECAUSE THEY
DIDN'T HAVE A PARTNER OR BECAUSE
THEY HAD GONE THROUGH A DIVORCE
OR WEREN'T IN THE RIGHT
RELATIONSHIP.
THEY FROZE FOR LOVE.
NOW WE'RE SEEING THIS BEING PUT
OUT THERE AS SOMETHING, WOULD A
32-YEAR-OLD FREEZE BECAUSE SHE
WANTED TO PUT MORE YEARS IN HER
CAREER.
IT IS UNCHARTERED.
WE DON'T KNOW HOW WOMEN WILL
MAKE DECISIONS IN TERMS OF
PLANNING THEIR FAMILY AND WORK
AND LOVE LIVES AND DATING LIVES.
SO IT'S UNKNOWN RIGHT NOW.
>> Ifill: ALTA CHARO, ARE
THERE HEALTH RISKS INVOLVED IN
THIS PROCEDURE?
>> PROBABLY NOT AS MANY AS
PEOPLE FEAR.
CERTAINLY THE QUESTION OF HOW TO
OBTAIN WOMEN'S EGGS HAS COME UP
BEFORE, WHETHER FOR IN VITRO
FERTILIZATION IN THE 1980s OR
FOR THE CLONING OF EGGS FOR
RESEARCH IN THE 1990s AND THE
EARLY PART OF THIS CENTURY.
THERE HAS BEEN SOME CONCERN ALL
ALONG THAT THE USE OF THE DRUGS
NECESSARY TO HELP THEM SUPER
OVULATE MIGHT CAUSE PROBLEMS,
BUT THE DATA SUGGESTS THAT IT'S
ACTUALLY VERY SAFE.
IT IS, HOWEVER, VERY
UNCOMFORTABLE AND CERTAINLY NOT
AN EXPERIENCE ONE WELCOMES IF
YOU CAN AVOID IT.
>> SARAH ELIZABETH RICHARD,
LET'S TALK ABOUT WHAT
CONVERSATIONS THIS DOES OPEN AND
DOESN'T OPEN.
FOR INSTANCE, SOME PEOPLE SAID
EXPANDING WOMEN'S OPPORTUNITY TO
HAVE CHILDREN WOULD MEAN
EXPANDING DAY CARE OR PAID
MATERNITY LEAVE.
DOES THIS TAKE THE PLACE OF
THAT?
>> I REALLY HOPE NOT.
THAT'S BEEN A BIG POINT THAT A
LOT OF WOMEN HAVE TALKED ABOUT.
IT CERTAINLY DOESN'T REPLACE
THAT CONVERSATION.
IN FACT, ONE OF THE GREAT
OUTCOMES OF EVEN TALKING ABOUT
ALL THIS IS THAT WE ARE TALKING
MORE ABOUT HAVING AFFORDABLE
CHILDCARE AND BETTER MATERNITY
LEAVE.
SO IT'S ALMOST LIKE ONE IS
BRINGING UP THE OTHER
CONVERSATION.
SO I THINK ALL SUBJECTS RISE IN
THIS SITUATION.
>> Ifill: LET ME STAY WITH YOU
FOR A SECOND.
IS THIS SOMETHING WITH ONLY
RESOURCES CAN AFFORD?
EVERYBODY DOESN'T WORK FOR APPLE
AND FACEBOOK, RIGHT IN.
>> THE FUNNY THING IS THOSE
WOMEN CAN PROBABLY AFFORD IT
ANYWAY BECAUSE I HEAR THE
SALARIES ARE QUITE GOOD THERE.
NO, IT'S NOT SOMETHING THAT ALL
WOMEN CAN AFFORD.
THAT'S ONE OF THE BIG PROBLEMS
OR CHALLENGES IN MAKING IT
ACCESSIBLE TO A LOT OF WOMEN.
ONE OF THE WOMEN IN MY BOOK, SHE
PUT IT ON A CREDIT CARD AND PAID
THAT BALANCE OFF OVER MANY
YEARS.
OTHER WOMEN HAVE GOTTEN HELP
FROM THEIR PARENTS.
I WAS REALLY LUCKY.
I USED MY SAVINGS AND THEN MY
PARENTS HELPED ME.
BUT, YOU KNOW, THAT'S NOT FAIR
BECAUSE A LOT OF WOMEN DON'T GET
ACCESS TO IT.
THAT SAID, THOUGH, THE PRICES
ARE COMING DOWN.
WE'RE SEEING IT BEING OFFERED
FOR AS LOW AS $4,000 IN SOME
MARKETS AND A LOT OF CLINICS ARE
OFFERING PACKAGES, FOR EXAMPLE,
YOU CAN BUY THREE CYCLES WHICH
WOULD GIVE YOU THE OPPORTUNITY
TO PUT AWAY ENOUGH EGGS WHERE
YOU HAVE A LITTLE CHANCE OF ONE
TURN ENTERING A BABY LATER.
THEY'RE OFFERING ALL KINDS OF
DIFFERENT PRICING SCHEMES.
SO IT'S DEFINITELY GETTING
BETTER.
>> TECHNOLOGY IS A GREAT THING
IN MANY, MANY CASES, BUT IN THIS
CASE WE'RE USING TECHNOLOGY TO
ENHANCE A LIFESTYLE CHOICE,
AREN'T WE?
>> WELL, I THINK WHAT WE'RE
SEEING IS TECHNOLOGY BEING USED
TO MAKE IT POSSIBLE TO KEEP THE
WORKPLACE ORGANIZED JUST THE WAY
IT IS AND THE WAY IT WAS
ORIGINALLY DESIGNED FOR MEN,
WHOSE CAREERS AND EDUCATIONS
WOULD TAKE PLACE RIGHT AFTER
THEY FINISH HIGH SCHOOL INTO
THEIR 20s, AND WHERE WOMEN
WOULD IDEALLY BE ABLE TO HAVE
CHILDREN EARLIER IN LIFE WHEN
THEIR BODIES ARE BETTER SUITED
TO IT.
WOMEN ARE NOW USING TECHNOLOGY
TO TRY TO MAKE THEMSELVES SEEM
AS MUCH LIKE MAN AS POSSIBLE.
SO THEY CAN HAVE THEIR CHILDREN
LATER AFTER THEY LAID THE
GROUNDWORK FOR THEIR CAREER.
IT IS ABSOLUTELY TRUE.
THIS IS GIVING WOMEN OPTIONS AND
IT'S MAKING IT ECONOMICALLY
FEASIBLE.
IT'S PROBABLY THE MOST REALISTIC
THING FOR SOME WOMEN, BUT IT IS
A SHAME THAT WE HAVEN'T STARTED
A BETTER CONVERSATION NOT ONLY
ABOUT THE FIXES LIKE THE DAY
CARE THAT WAS JUST MENTIONED BUT
A DEEPER CONVERSATION ABOUT HOW
TO REORGANIZE THE WORK WORLD SO
YOU DON'T NEED TO BE A SUPER
WOMAN AT WORK AND A SUPER WOMAN
AT HOME AT THE SAME TIME.
THAT'S NEVER BEEN REAL IZIC.
I THINK THE EXFREEZING IS A
SEVERE RESPONSE TO IT.
>> Ifill: IS THIS AT THE
FRONTIER OF THE CONVERSATION?
>> WE'RE DEFINITELY AT THE
FRONTIER OF THE CONVERSATION.
THAT SAID, IF YOU'RE A WOMAN IN
YOUR EARLY 30s OR LATE 20s
AND YOU DON'T HAVE PARTNER OR
YOU DON'T SEE STARTING YOUR
FAMILY BY THE AGE OF 35, IF YOU
CAN AFFORD IT, THERE'S NO REASON
NOT TO FREEZE BECAUSE YOU MAY
NOT START YOUR FAMILY UNTIL
YOU'RE 38 AND THOSE EGGS MIGHT
COME IN HANDY.
BUT A LOT OF WOMEN DON'T REALIZE
IS WHAT IF YOU WANT A SECOND OR
THIRD BABY AND YOU'RE IN YOUR
MID-30s OR EARLY 40s.
YOU MAY WANT THOSE EGGS.
>> IT'S NOT SO EASY TO HAVE
CHILDREN IN YOUR LATE 30s AND
EARLY 40s.
IT'S NOT SOMETHING WE WANT TO
ENCOURAGE PEOPLE TO DO IF THEY
DON'T HAVE TO.
THIS IS NOT THE BEST TIME FOR
YOU AND YOUR BODY TO DO THIS.
I DON'T THINK IT'S A GOOD IDEA
TO ENCOURAGE WOMEN TO MAKE LIFE
HARDER FOR THEMSELVES.
>> Ifill: ALTA CHARO AND SARAH
ELIZABETH RICHARDS, AUTHOR OF
"MOTHER RESCHEDULED," THANK YOU
BOTH VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT, A
RE-EXAMINATION OF THREE CLASSICS
OF AMERICAN LITERATURE.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THAT.
>> Brown: IN A UTILITARIAN
SYSTEM, BOOKS CAN BE DANGEROUS.
WHAT ABOUT IN A DEMOCRACY,
SPECIFICALLY IN OUR OWN?
WHAT
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
WHAT PLACE SHOULD WE MAKE FOR
IT?
THE NEW BOOK, THE REPUBLIC OF
IMAGINATION, MIXES MEMOIR WITH
LITERARY CRIMP AND POLICY
CRITIQUE.
TO EXPLORE SUCH QUESTIONS, ITS
AUTHOR, AZAR NAFISI, PREVIOUSLY
ADDRESSED THEM IN THE BESTSELLER
"READING LOLITA IN TEHRAN."
WELCOME.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: SO IN TEHRAN IN
THOSE YEARS, LITERATURE WAS
DANGEROUS.
HERE VERY DIFFERENT, RIGHT?
>> THE WAY I FEEL IS THAT BOOKS
ARE DANGEROUS IN THEIR OWN WAY
IN EVERY SOCIETY.
BUT THE WAY WE TREAT THEM HERE,
THE WAY WE DESTROY THEM HERE, IS
NOT THROUGH GUNS OR BULLET OR
JAIL.
WE JUST BECOME INDIFFERENT
TOWARD THEM.
>> INDIFFERENT?
>> INDIFFERENCE IS ONE OF THE
MOST FATAL WEAPONS YOU CAN USE.
YOU DON'T SEE, YOU DON'T HEAR,
YOU DON'T TOUCH.
RAY BRADBURY SAYS THAT YOU DON'T
HAVE TO BURN BOOKS TO DESTROY A
CULTURE.
ONLY GET PEOPLE NOT TO READ
THEM.
THEY ARE ALMOST LIKE FLOWERS
THAT JUST WITHER AND DIE IF
THERE ARE NO READERS.
>> Brown: YOU SEE THAT
HAPPENING IN OUR SOCIETY?
>> I SEE THAT HAPPENING IN OUR
SOCIETY.
I NOTICED IT WHEN I RETURNED TO
AMERICA IN 1997.
I NOTICED IT IN THE WAY THEY
WERE BEING TAUGHT AT
UNIVERSITIES.
A LOT OF TIMES IN MANY ENGLISH
CLASSES, NOT ALL BY ANY MEANS,
THEY WERE TAUGHT AS HANDMAIDENS
TO SOMETHING POLITICAL OR
IDEOLOGICAL.
>> Brown: IN THE BOOK YOU USE
SEVERAL CLASSICS OF AMERICAN
LITERATURE, JUST TO PICK ONE,
THE MIDDLE ONE, WHICH IS
SINCLAIR LEWIS' "BABBITT."
YOU USE THAT AS A WAY TO LOOK AT
WHAT IS HAPPENING TO TODAY.
REMIND US FIRST OF ALL,
"BABBITT," WHY THAT IS IMPORTANT
TO YOU.
"BABBITT" IS SUCH A WONDERFUL
BOOK IN SO MANY WAY, BUT THE
ESSENCE OF "BABBITT" IS THE SORT
OF ROTARIAN OR THE CORPORATE
MAN, THE MAN IN THE MIDDLE WHO
IS NOT REALLY THE TOP BUT WITH A
BUSINESS MIND.
AND WHAT "BABBITT" REPRESENTS IS
MORE THAN ANYTHING ELSE THOUGHT.
HIS HOME, THE WAY HE SPEAKS, ALL
OF THEM ARE ACCORDING TO A RULE,
BUT IT IS THAT STANDARDIZATION
OF THOUGHT, AND IN "BABBITT," IT
WILL SOON BE 100 YEARS SINCE
THAT BOOK WAS WRITTEN, THE
STANDARD FOR SUCCESS, LIKE NOW,
IS MONEY.
AND EVEN THE WAY HE SPEAKS, YOU
KNOW, THE WAY WE TALK ABOUT JOB
CREATORS.
>> YES, JOB CREATORS.
SO YOU TAKE IT FURTHER.
YOU LOOK IN OUR SCHOOLS, AT THE
EMPHASIS ON OUTCOMES, ON
TESTING, ON THE COMMON CORE, AND
YOU SEE SOMETHING THAT IS TOO
MUCH FOCUSED ON UTILITY, ON
JOBS, ON OUTCOMES?
>> YES.
AND IN BABBITT, HIS SON TELLS
HIM, I DON'T KNOW WHY WE HAVE TO
READ THIS SHAKESPEARE AND THEM.
AND BABBITT TALKS ABOUT HOW HE
LIKES THESE... THEY DIDN'T HAVE
TELEVISION THEN, BUT HOW HE
LIKES THESE CLASSES WHERE
PROFESSOR SO AND SO TEACHES YOU.
HE SAID, READ SHAKESPEARE AND
THEM BECAUSE YOU HAVE TO PASS.
THAT'S HIS PHILOSOPHY.
I THINK THAT'S WHAT COMMON CORE,
IT'S A MANIFESTATION OF AN
ATTITUDE.
IT IS NOT YOU DID THIS WRONG
HERE OUR THERE.
IT IS THE FACT THAT YOU'RE
SAYING, OUR CHILDREN SHOULD GO
TO SCHOOL AND LATER TO COLLEGE,
NOT BECAUSE THEY'RE PASSIONATE
ABOUT IT, NOT BECAUSE THEY
WANT SOME MEANINGFUL
FULFILLMENT, BUT BECAUSE THEY
SHOULD BE CAREER-READY.
RIGHT OUT OF "BABBITT."
>> WHAT'S BEING LOST?
>> IT'S WHAT'S BEING LOST IN A
DEMOCRACY, BECAUSE IN A
DEMOCRACY, BOTH THE INDIVIDUAL
AND SOCIETY HAVE
RESPONSIBILITIES, AND THE
SOCIETY'S RESPONSIBILITY IS TO
PROVIDE THE CITIZENS WITH
OPPORTUNITY TO FULFILL
THEMSELVES AS HUMAN BEINGS.
WHEN YOU TAKE FULFILLMENT,
MEANING, PASSION OUT OF
EDUCATION, IMAGINATION, YOU ARE
TAKING IT NOT JUST OUT OF
HUMANITY, YOU'RE TAKING IT OUT
OF SCIENCE.
SCIENCE ITSELF IS ALL ABOUT THE
PASSION TO DISCOVER, YOU KNOW?
AND WHY SHOULD OUR CHILDREN WANT
TO GIVE BACK IF ALL THEY GO TO
SCHOOL IS BASED ON GREED AND
MAKING MORE MONEY?
WHY SHOULD THEY EVEN WANT TO
SERVE THEIR COUNTRY OR BE
CONCERNED ABOUT WHAT HAPPENS IN
THIS COUNTRY WHEN WE ALL TEACH
THEM THIS IS A DOG EAT DOG WORLD
AND EACH FOR HIS OWN.
>> SO WHAT DO YOU WANT TO SEE
HAPPEN?
WHAT WOULD YOU PROPOSE TO REGAIN
THIS SENSE OF, AS YOU PUT IT,
THE PUBLIC OF IMAGINATION?
>> WELL, THE FIRST THING IS I
THINK WE NEED A NATIONAL
CONVERSATION VERY SERIOUSLY
ABOUT DEFINING OURSELVES.
YOU KNOW, AMERICA, LIKE THE REST
OF THE WORLD, IS IN CRISIS.
I FEEL THAT THIS CRISIS IS NOT
JUST ECONOMIC OR POLITICAL.
IT'S A CRISIS OF VISION.
SO THIS TIME OF RAPID CHANGE,
BOTH IN ECONOMY, TECHNOLOGY AND
ALL SORTS OF OTHER THINGS, WE
NEED A NATIONAL DISCUSSION ABOUT
WHAT KIND OF AN AMERICA DO WE
WANT TO BE.
AND THEN THE FIRST THING THAT
YOU GO THROUGH IS EDUCATION, IS
HUMANITY, BECAUSE I BELIEVE THAT
THE BASIS OF THIS COUNTRY, AS
GEORGE WASHINGTON ALSO BELIEVES,
IS ENLIGHTENMENT.
THE IDEA OF ENLIGHTENMENT.
AND YOU FORGET THAT, WHAT ARE
YOU LEFT WITH?
>>
>> Brown: ALL RIGHT.
THE NEW BOOK IS "THE REPUBLIC OF
THE IMAGINATION."
AZAR NAFISI, THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
SHOOTINGS ERUPTED AT CANADA'S
WAR MEMORIAL AND THE MAIN
PARLIAMENT BUILDING IN OTTAWA.
ONE SOLDIER AND A GUNMAN WERE
KILLED.
AND THE C.D.C. ANNOUNCED THAT
STARTING MONDAY PEOPLE ARRIVING
IN THE U.S. FROM THREE WEST
AFRICAN STATES WILL BE MONITORED
FOR EBOLA FOR 21 DAYS.
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE, BEFORE THE EX-GAMES MADE
SKATEBOARD CULTURE PART OF THE
MAINSTREAM, AND BEFORE HIP-HOP
ARTISTS TOPPED THE BILLBOARD
CHARTS, PHOTOGRAPHER GLEN
FRIEDMAN CAPTURED THESE
SUBCULTURES OF THE 1980'S.
HIS NEW BOOK IS "MY RULES" AND
YOU CAN SEE A PHOTO GALLERY OF
HIS WORK, ON ART BEAT.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, pbs.org/newshour.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON THURSDAY, WE SIT DOWN WITH
MATTHEW BRODERICK ABOUT HIS
RETURN TO BROADWAY IN "IT'S ONLY
A PLAY."
I'M GWEN IFILL.
AND I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
JOIN US ON-LINE AND AGAIN HERE
TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.